Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Welcome now to session 407,
Java Performance.
Please welcome now Jim Laskey
and Victor Hernandez.
My name is Victor Hernandez,
and I'm a member of the
Java Runtime Technologies team.
and I will be giving this talk.
We're hoping to round off your week
of Java sessions with some hints
on how to write code for better
performance and also a preview of
upcoming technologies that will be
available to you in coming JDK 1.4.
So what is the goal of this session?
The goal of this session is for
you to have a better understanding
of exactly how and why your
application performs as it does.
We'll be discussing improvements that are
being made to the Hotspot JIT compiler,
especially in the JDK 1.4
timeframe that will improve the
performance of your application.
And we'll also be introducing to
you new APIs that are available in
JDK 1.4 that will be improving the
performance as well if you use them.
So the structure of the
presentation is Jim will be
talking about hotspot compilation.
I'll be introducing new
APIs available to you in JDK 1.4,
which are also available to you
in the developer preview that
we're making available to you from
the developer.apple.com website.
And we'll have a quick summary and
then we'll bring up all the members
of Java Runtime Technologies team
to answer your questions.
So I'm going to pass it off to Jim now.
Good morning, survivors.
One of the main factors in determining
the performance of a Java VM is how well
its just-in-time compiler can convert
Java bytecodes into native machine code.
In past presentations,
we've talked about various elements of
the Java language and how the compiler
takes those elements and converts them to
machine code and how we can potentially
rework code so that you can get the best
possible optimization from the compiler.
This year,
because we're switching over to 1.4,
we've been working on 1.4,
I want to talk a bit about the
A bit about some of the new
technologies that have been introduced
in the compiler and some of the
new optimizations that are being done.
Specifically,
I want to talk about six new or
improved technologies that are
coming along the line with 1.4.
Class hierarchy analysis,
dynamic compilation.
Class hierarchy analysis is new.
Dynamic compilation is partially new.
Full speed debugging is a new feature.
Aggressive inlining is a new feature.
We've had inlining before,
but aggressive inlining is a new feature.
An expansion on intrinsics
and something totally new,
which has been sort of the crux
of the new work that we've done,
something called the low-level
intermediate representation.
First of all, we'll talk about class
hierarchy analysis.
One of the things that if you're
working in the Java environment
you'll eventually figure out is that
in the class hierarchy of all the
classes that you're working with,
only about 80% of them
actually are subclass.
80% of them are never subclassed.
They're never overshadowed
by other classes.
There's only about 20% of your working
classes that are actually overshadowed.
You can think of these classes
as being Gleef classes or in
Java terminology as final classes,
even though you don't
have them tagged as final.
And within those classes that are leafs,
more often than not,
you only overshadow a few of the
methods that are in the parent class.
And because you're only
overshadowing a few of them,
a lot of those methods could
be considered as final as well,
even though they're not tagged as final.
And this influences the optimization
that's done by the compiler.
Another factor that's involved
here is instance of testing.
Instance of is one of the more
expensive operations in the VM,
because what we need to do to test to
see if an object is a member of a class
is to extract the class field that's in
the object and compare it against the
class that you're trying to test against.
And if it doesn't match,
then you have to search up the
class hierarchy in order to
see if you can find a match.
And another factor that's involved
here is instance of testing.
Instance of is one of the more
expensive operations in the VM,
because what we need to do to test to
see if an object is a member of a class
is to extract the class field that's in
the object and compare it against the
class that you're trying to test against.
And if it doesn't match,
then you have to search up the
class hierarchy in order to
see if you can find a match.
see if you can find a match in
the class hierarchy to see if
it's actually an instance of.
So it's a fairly expensive operation.
Fundamentally,
what we're trying to do here
is to improve performance.
We find that virtual calls cost a lot
more than your final calls or your static
calls because there's a lot of overhead
in searching for the matching method,
doing a lookup, and so on.
What we want to try to do is reduce
as many of our virtual calls into
the same state as a final call,
a call to a final method.
Okay, so this is sort of the
background of what we're trying
to do or trying to influence.
In 1.3.1 VM,
we have very conservative optimizations
in relation to class hierarchy and
the influence of how classes relate
to each other and also with methods.
When we're doing an instance of,
we check to see if the class
is a member of the -- or sorry,
the object is a member of the class,
and then we search up the class
hierarchy to see if we can get a match.
It can be fairly expensive.
Then we also have to make the
assumption that any method that's
being called has to be thought
of as -- in a virtual sense,
has to be treated as virtual.
We can't do any kind of optimization
around that because we always have to
assume that that method can be overridden
and we might introduce a new class
that might force a virtual dispatch.
So in 1.4, we have this new technology
called Class Hierarchy Analysis.
And what it does is it does a
more detailed analysis of how
classes relate to each other,
both in an inheritance chain and how
methods that implement interfaces,
how their relation works together.
And in doing that,
we can do a few things that
will improve the optimization
in the MUNI compiling method.
The first thing is that knowing a
-- the first thing is basically a
faster instance of knowing that a
class is final allows us to do a very
straightforward test to see if it's a
member when we're doing instance of.
So you're already aware of
JavaLangString as being a final class.
So if you're checking to see
if something is a string,
you're comparing the test internally
is basically pull up the class
out of the object and compare
it against the JavaLangString
class and see if there's a match.
And that's all -- so it's
a very simple compare.
If it doesn't match,
then it's not a member of -- there's
no searching up the hierarchy.
It's a final class.
That's a very simple test.
With Class Hierarchy Analysis,
we can actually perform the same simple
test on any class which is considered
a leaf class from the hierarchy.
So it's the same thing.
It's the same thing.
So we went through and annotated each
of the leaf classes as being final,
at least for that point in time.
There's also a secondary type
of mechanism for things that are
actually in a class hierarchy.
Instead of searching up a linked list,
we construct an inheritance
table for all classes.
In that way,
we can assign an inheritance depth for a
class and index directly in that table.
Again, instead of searching up the chain,
we can do a simple check,
but we pull it out of the inheritance
table and make it a lot faster.
In the class hierarchy analysis,
we also do a method level analysis.
So in 1.3, we only check on a per class
basis whether a method is
overshadowed by a subclass or not.
In 1.4, we look at every
individual method and say,
is this actually overshadowed or not?
And this is true also in interfaces.
Do we see how many implementations
of a particular method?
If there's only one implementation,
then we don't have to dispatch
using an interface-type call.
We can make a direct
call to that function.
Okay, so what does this
analysis allow us to do?
It allows us to make direct calls instead
of virtual or interface-level calls,
and then it's much faster.
You just basically do a
direct branch to the routine.
You don't have to worry about checking to
see if it's the right class or whatever.
It also allows us to do inlining,
and I'll be talking about this a
little bit further in other slides.
It allows us to inline across
virtual and interface calls.
So where we couldn't inline
a method call before,
we can now do that because
we basically can say,
at this point in time,
we can think of this as
being a final method.
We're not going to do a virtual dispatch.
We can inline that code
directly into the call point.
Thank you.
The second technology is something
called dynamic compilation,
and we've always had some kind
of dynamic compilation in Java.
J2SE kicks in initially when
you're basically converting from an
interpreted execution for a particular
method to its compiled version.
We have a transition from
interpreted to compiled.
But as you'll see in the next slide,
we've gone a little bit further
and allows us to do a little
bit more substitution of
compiled and interpreted code.
So, with dynamic,
and what we're trying to do here is
basically get better code generation
or better optimization based
on the current state of things.
So, as I've said in the
previous slide about CHA,
we can think of leaf classes or methods
that are in leaf classes as final.
That means we can do better
optimization knowing exactly
what method that we're calling.
So, we can make assumptions
about the current state.
We'd like to make assumptions
And then we could do that,
but then we'd be sort of disrupted by the
fact that dynamic loading of classes may
introduce a subclass and basically force
us to throw away all of our assumptions.
So if we have to throw
away our assumptions,
we have to throw away the code
that we've generated as well.
And that's where dynamic
compilation kicks in.
So in 1.3.1, we are very conservative.
The compiler can make no
assumptions about classes.
It basically just has to compile them,
assuming that new classes will
be loaded and that if I have a
virtual dispatch in the code,
I have to leave the virtual
dispatch there and I can't do
any optimization around it.
In 1.4,
we can compile during the current state
and then do a dynamic replacement.
So we can compile assuming that
a particular method is final or a
particular class is final based on CHA.
But then if a class is loaded
and changes that relationship,
changes the relationship,
then we can dynamically
replace that method on the fly.
And the two technologies
that we use to do that,
well the first one has always
been there and this is something
On-Stack Replacement allows
us to replace something that's
currently being interpreted.
with its compiled version.
So that's basically interpreted
through to compiled code.
OSR specifically deals with
methods that are looping for
long periods of time and you want
What's been introduced in 1.4 is
something called deoptimization,
where we're allowed to replace
a compiled version of the code
with its interpreted equivalent.
Now, how is that connected with
replacing it with compile code?
So presumably what we
can do is that we can
Initially interpret a method,
then replace it with
its compiled version,
load a new class which forces
recompilation of that class.
So in the meantime,
while it's being recompiled,
we replace it with its
old interpreted version.
And then once it's finished
recompiling in its new form,
then we can switch it back
to this compiled form.
So this is transition state.
So the advantages of deoptimization
are that we can correct for
changes in the class hierarchy,
We could also introduce
higher levels of optimization.
So if a method is running for long
periods of time and we think we can
get better optimization on that,
spend more time making
a better optimization,
we could replace it with a
higher level of optimization.
And then finally,
we could debug compiled methods.
And then we get into the next slide,
which is something called
full-speed debugging.
In 1.3, in order to enable debugging,
what we do is we debug
only interpreted code.
And the reason we do that is that
it's very easy to map the interpretive
bytecode back to the source code.
So if you want to do
source-level debugging,
there's very easy mapping there.
The problem with that is that
when you're running interpreted,
It can be too slow.
I'll just give an exaggerated example.
If you have a program that calculates 20
million data points before it craps out,
then you could be sitting
there for quite a while getting
those data points calculated.
So if you could actually run it in
compiled mode and then hit the bug,
then you're not sitting
there for as long time.
Now why can't you compile or why
can't you debug compile code directly?
Well, because of the optimization that
occurs against the compile code,
it's not that easy to map from the
compile code back to the source code.
So we need to transition
from the compiled code back
into the interpreted code.
So as I say at the bottom line there,
debugging in 1.3.1 forces
interpretation across the board.
So you're forced to interpret.
In 1.4.1,
when you turn debug using Xdebug,
we don't disable the compiler.
The compiler still compiles everything.
But then if you hit a break point or
you start stepping through the code,
then those methods get converted
over into interpretive methods.
So then we can step through
the bytecode and debug it.
The mechanism for doing
that is quite interesting.
I won't get into any details here,
but it's basically when we want to
de-optimize a particular execution,
we just set it up so that when
we return back to that execution,
we go into some handling code,
which does the actual substitution
of the current compiled frame
with some interpreted frames.
Now, in the first technology,
we talked about class hierarchy analysis
and the ability to sort of temporarily,
at least,
think of methods as being final methods.
Knowing that a method is at least
temporarily thought of as being final,
this allows us to say, okay,
we can make direct calls to that method,
or if the method is sufficiently simple,
we can inline it at the call point.
So more often than not,
if you're writing small, concise methods,
the cost of actually calling
the method far outweighs what's
actually going on inside the method.
So it may be a simple accessor
to return the value of field,
or do a simple calculation,
or get the value of a static.
[Transcript missing]
In 1.3.1, because we didn't have
these earlier technologies,
we can only really inline simple
accessors and statics and final methods.
So the level of inlining is very small.
With Hotspot 1.4,
we can increase the complexity and depth
of the types of methods that we inline,
primarily because of thinking
of methods as being...
as methods as being final so we can
have accessors that call accessors
that call other accessors that can
be all brought in and in lined.
We also allow for methods that have
exception handling to also be in line.
So we've allowed for more
types of methods to be in line.
It takes advantage of the CHA to
specify candidates as being final,
knowing that we can always deoptimize
those methods and replace them.
And this gives us significant
improvement in performance.
And I think we've already seen one of
the Grand Canyon examples where we've
actually doubled the frame rate just
purely by using aggressive in line.
Intrinsics are something
that we've had for a while.
Basically,
they're core methods that we realize
that are used a lot and that we
could do better by hand coding some
assembly code for those routines.
The types of things you can do are, say,
reduce the JNI call overhead
if it's a JNI support routine.
There may be a better
implementation in native code,
like, for instance, sine or cosine.
Sometimes there's
performance bottlenecks,
like maybe Java-laying string charAt,
which are used a lot,
and we know that we could
hand-tune a little bit better.
These are types of things that we
would like to convert into intrinsics.
What happens is that we,
instead of calling out the method,
we insert specific code to deal
with that particular problem.
We can use the method
to solve the problem,
but we don't want to use the
method to solve the problem.
We want to use the method
to solve the problem.
Some examples are sine, cosine,
square root, and string charAt.
With 1.4.1, we've expanded the number of
intrinsics we've implemented.
The most important one
probably is new I/O.
In new I/O, when you're calling one of
the native buffer accessors,
we actually insert the code that
directly accesses the buffer.
So that's a lot faster than going
through the equivalent Java code.
And one of the big performance
improvements would be eliminating
the per-byte accessors.
So in the old I/O code,
whenever you wanted to read
an integer from a buffer,
you had to assemble the integer
value one byte at a time,
and that would take about 21
native instructions to do that.
But because we can treat
that as an intrinsic,
we can actually read one integer
value directly from the buffer.
So there's a big performance
improvement there.
Thread allocation is inline,
so when you do a new,
the code for allocating the new is right
inline with your code because it really,
really minimally is just incrementing
a pointer to do that allocation.
So we don't need to call a
subroutine to deal with that.
Same is true with instance
of and check cast.
So in the simple cases where we're just
doing a compare to see if the object
class matches the class we're looking at,
we don't call a subroutine to do that.
We do it inline.
And similarly with monitors.
And final technology I want to talk
about is something called low-level
intermediate representation.
It's probably not really much
of an interest unless you're
into compiler technology and
understand compiler technology.
But whenever you do compilation,
you have some intermediate representation
that you do your manipulation on.
It takes either the bytecode
in Java or let's say if
you're compiling a C program,
you convert the text of the C program
into some intermediate representation.
The problem with the intermediate
representation in 1.3.1 was that
it was too high level and didn't
allow us to do detail optimizations
specifically for PowerPC.
And they were having the same
problem with the other platforms.
So Sun introduced this
The LIR is actually much finer grained
and is closer to the native instructions.
There would be one LIR instruction
for add and there would be one
LIR instruction for load from an array
or actually load from a memory location.
There is some higher level
functionality to deal with some
support things like virtual calls
or type checks or intrinsics.
But for the most part,
you can deal with everything
at the lowest level.
And what does this allow us to do?
Well, it allows us to do
peephole optimizations.
And peephole optimizations would
be things like you might have a
shift operation and a mask operation
at the higher level or in the IR,
sorry, the LEER.
And on the PowerPC,
shift and mask is something that's all
done in one specific PowerPC instruction.
So we can take those two
instructions and merge them into
a single PowerPC instruction.
And we couldn't do that at
the higher level before.
It was much more complicated.
Since the IR represents
the native instructions,
we can do better register allocation
because we can do the register allocation
rate in the IR and we don't have to
do it in a platform-specific way at
the higher level where we weren't
doing very good register allocation,
so that's much improved.
Because things have
broken down a little bit,
whenever we access an array,
We don't have to worry about the range
check and getting the base address
of the data and so on and so forth.
That's all broken down in finer grain.
So now we can do unsafe
array access where we can,
once we've got the base address
for an array calculated,
we can get multiple entries
out of that array without going
through those other calculations.
So that improves performance as well.
Okay, so what I want to do now is
talk about how to utilize
some of these improvements.
The first one, of course, is write small,
concise methods.
I've always sort of promoted that,
but before, when you do that,
you make much cleaner code and
it's a lot easier to compile
because you're only compiling
specific code at different points.
But now, you don't really have to pay as
much penalty for writing small,
concise methods because of inlining.
If your method is small
enough to fit in its caller,
it'll get inlined.
You don't pay the call overhead,
so it's to an advantage
to continue that process.
I always think accessors as being in
line to try to keep all external access
of fields and statics through accessors.
That way you have the advantage of
changing how those fields are accessed.
You can put restrictions on them.
This also makes it easier for
debugging to find out who's
accessing those fields on you.
You can write those accessor
functions or methods knowing
that potentially they will,
for the most part, they will be in line.
There will be no cost for putting
them in accessor wrappers.
Final is somewhat superficial at
this point now that we have CHA.
With CHA, we basically take classes
that we can assume that are,
at least temporarily, that are final.
And the optimization levels that you
would have gotten before with specifying
final basically propagate to as many
cases as the compiler can figure out.
So final is superficial.
It's It's really
unnecessary at this point.
Because new is inlined and we
do this per thread allocation,
it doesn't make really that
much sense to keep pools around
for specifically small objects.
Larger objects, it's okay.
If you have buffers that are 64K
bytes or something like that,
it makes sense to have
pools for those maybe.
But for smaller objects that
are going to be just around
for a short period of time,
new is pretty fast and you don't
really need to keep pools for those.
Java Dev, there was a discussion recently
about programming by exception.
Try to avoid using exceptions
as your programming model.
Do your tests in code and use
exceptions for exceptional cases.
That's really what they're designed for.
As an example,
if you were to rely on the system
to do your null checking for you,
when you hit the null pointer exception,
it actually throws a
Mach kernel exception.
We go into an exception handler.
It goes and assembles the exception.
We have to do a trace
back up through the stack.
It can be pretty expensive.
In your code, you could have just said,
if object's not equal to null,
which is pretty lightweight.
Exception handling also
inhibits optimization.
So within your try/catch area,
it can be pretty hard on the compiler
as far as what it can keep in registers,
as an example,
because if a value is sitting in a
register and an exception is thrown,
then that value in the register is lost.
So the compiler has to make sure that
all values it's currently working
with are stuffed out in memory,
and that can add to overall cost.
So try to keep your catch-try around
the minimal amount of code so that
you can get optimization around that.
On the other hand,
if you have exception handling in there,
it doesn't cost anything
until it's actually used.
So when you enter a try block,
there's no cost as far as additional
instructions are concerned.
And finally,
the Hotspot compiler has been
optimized for fairly clean code.
Two things that disrupt that a bit
are JIKs and if you use an obfuscator.
They rearrange the byte codes in such a
way that it's hard to pick up patterns.
So what we recommend is that
you use JIKs for development,
which basically gives
you speed of compilation,
a quick turnaround in the compilation.
But then if you're actually
going to deploy it and you want
performance from the resulting code,
then use Java C.
The obfuscators,
some of them are very mean as
far as compilers are concerned.
I've seen some of them that actually
put exception handlers around every
sequence of byte codes just to
totally confuse the decompilers.
That can be really hard on
the compiler as far as getting
optimization is concerned.
With that,
I'm going to pass it back to Victor.
Thank you, Jim.
New API in Java 2 Standard Edition 1.4.
It's pretty straightforward.
With every major revision from Sun,
you're going to get a
lot of new packages,
a lot of new APIs,
some of which you're interested,
some of which you're not going to use,
but they're all going to be
there because they've been
standardized into the Java platform.
What are the new APIs?
So I will be introducing the new APIs,
and then I will be concentrating
on one API in particular that is
very special and exciting because it
provides a performance opportunity
and not just added functionality.
I will also be introducing changes
that are going to be made to the
Java native interface with 1.4,
and I will be showing a demo
highlighting this new performance
opportunity and also some of the
work that Jim has been discussing
in the first half of this talk.
So we know we get tons of new API.
Basically,
I see the new non-GUI API basically
into two categories plus a
bunch of miscellaneous packages.
There's the new I/O packages,
which let you do I/O in a
much more optimized way,
and I will be going into
much more detail on those.
Then there's all the XML packages.
that have been available
before as standard extensions,
but have now been brought
into the standard platform.
If you've attended any of the
WebObjects and Web Services sessions,
you'll know a lot about these.
Then there's a few
miscellaneous packages.
Java util logging gives you the
ability to do logging of your
application while it's running.
Java Utilprev lets you have
user and system-wide preferences
for your Java application.
And Java UtilregX,
regX meaning regular expressions.
So basically you now have support
for regular expression processing,
which is something, for example,
you can do very easily in Perl,
and now is being brought in
as a standard part of Java.
And there's also extensions
to the Java security package,
which can be found in the
JavaX security package.
So lots and lots of new functionality.
But specifically,
an opportunity for you to
improve the performance of your
application by using new I/O.
So I'm going to be now
concentrating on specifically that.
So that requires you to have a pretty
good understanding of what exactly is
wrong with the present state of Java I/O,
how those problems are solved by new I/O,
and then exactly how you
go about using new I/O.
The three parts... There's
basically four parts to the new I.O.
packages.
So there's native buffers,
there's channels,
there's Unicode support for the
I.O., and there's also JNI support
with new added functions.
So, we all know that
Java distinguishes between the
Java heap and the native heap,
and the Java heap is only for
Java objects and Java arrays.
And it makes this distinction to
be able to do the precise garbage
collection that we are able to do.
This unfortunately has the side effect
that if you ever need to gain access to a
Buffer that's residing in native memory.
You actually need,
and you want to do processing
on that buffer from Java code.
You need to copy it into the Java heap.
and you do that via JNI.
That has the added cost
of the JNI overhead,
which is definitely,
if you can avoid that, would be great.
There's also another problem with this,
which is the fact that now since
it's residing in the Java heap,
the garbage collector treats that
as a Java object and actually moves
it around during garbage collection.
Even though that native buffer we know
is not containing any objects and is just
simply an overhead of moving that around.
So both of these costs add up to--
Bad performance of your I/O if
you need to use native buffers,
which you need to do if you're
doing any file I/O or sockets.
So, why is it that these problems exist?
The problems exist because you
cannot get access to native
memory directly from Java code.
Every buffer has to have a native copy.
And as I explained before,
there's incredible overhead.
I don't know about incredible,
but there is overhead associated with the
JNI and CPU during the GC CPU overhead.
You might say, well, there is another way
of actually doing this,
which is basically getting access to
a buffer residing in your Java heap
from a native method using the
getPrimitiveOrAcritical JNI method.
That is true,
but you must be aware of the
fact that whenever you do a
getPrimitiveArrayCritical,
the garbage collector is actually
paused until you actually
release that primitive array.
While you're actually doing the
processing in your native method,
you actually might be pausing any
of your other threads if any of them
have gone into a situation where a
garbage collection needs to happen.
There's also the problem where our
collection moves the buffers around
so you have the CPU overhead of that.
You also can't do... There's
also limited functionality due
to the fact that the Java buffer,
the Java heap copy of the buffer
is actually moving around.
So you can't do things
like memory map files,
and you also can't do non-blocking I.O.
All of that leads to the fact that it's
pretty... that this does not scale well,
and anyone who has... who has written
a server trying to use Java I.O.
knows that you have to be rather careful.
As to, you know,
how many threads you open for all of
your connections and that sort of thing.
So how is Java new I.O.
going to fix this?
Pretty straightforward.
You have the ability now to both
allocate and directly access native
memory from your Java method.
You can allocate the native memory.
The way that this is introduced into
the Java platform is that it's actually
not an extension to the language,
but actually done via an API.
So, you actually are creating an
object wrapper that contains a
pointer to the native memory.
The really nice thing about this is
that you also have direct access without
having to go into a native method.
and that is done via get
and put method calls.
Those get and put method calls
are actually integrated into the
Hotspot JIT compiler as an intrinsic,
which Jim spoke about earlier,
so we can actually get incredibly
good performance out of this.
We also avoid the garbage collection in
JNI overrides simply because you don't
actually need to have any extra copies.
You have one copy which you can
directly access from both your
native methods and your Java code.
And you actually can do non-blocking I.O.
now since you have the ability
to do asynchronous operations
on that one location.
and the goal has been achieved,
which is basically to get
native IO performance.
One of the things that's interesting
about this is that since it's
been introduced as an API,
it actually is supplementing
the pre-existing Java I/O.
It doesn't replace it.
So you can continue to use your code,
which uses Java I/O.
But it might be interesting,
it might be worthwhile to change
it depending on the situation.
I'll go into those situations later.
But also it's interesting to note
that it is not fully used throughout
the Java runtime environment.
Particularly a lot of...
Graphics operations still are requiring
Java arrays as their underlying
representation for the graphics
and are not yet using native buffers.
That will be coming in
future releases of the JDK.
Support for that.
So there are three parts
to the new I/O APIs.
The first one is the
Java and I/O buffers.
These are containers for
data of primitive types.
There's a Java and I/O buffer
for every Java type.
There's an int buffer,
there's a char buffer,
there's a long buffer.
But underneath all of
that is a byte buffer.
and all the I/O operations are
actually done on the byte buffer.
As I said earlier,
you access these via get and put
methods and these are integrated
into the hotspot compiler.
Since the I/O operations are
actually done on byte buffers,
you actually need to
create a byte buffer,
use that byte buffer for
all your I/O operations,
and then actually when you
want to use it from Java,
you say byte buffer as int buffer
or byte buffer as long buffer
to get access to the Java types.
The byte buffer has
support for being direct.
By direct,
I mean that any I/O operation is
done trying to use the native buffer.
You have the ability of actually
adding a backing array that actually
is resident in the Java heap,
but if it's direct,
you can actually set it so
it uses the byte buffer.
Since the byte buffer
represents a native buffer,
you actually can do the memory mapped
One of the things that's
interesting about this is that the
allocation-to-allocation costs of
creating a Java NIO buffer is actually
greater than of creating an array.
Hotspot does a great job of
optimizing the allocation
directly into the Java heap,
both of objects and of arrays.
So it's not possible to get
as good performance as that.
Actually,
I wouldn't make that assertion anyways.
But the reality is that you
should be aware of this.
And it's not just simply, oh,
anywhere where I was using an array,
I now need to use an NIO buffer.
You basically need to check to see
if it applies to your application.
The best rule of thumb is that if it's
going to be long-living and it's large,
you want to avoid all those copies.
You want to avoid all the CPU overhead.
And therefore, it's probably worthwhile
to use a Java NIO buffer.
So where are the actual
I/O operations defined?
They're defined inside of the
Java and I/O channels package.
The Java and I/O channels
allow non-blocking and
interruptible operations.
There is support for file system access,
and that's in the file channel.
And that actually has,
as I've said before,
memory mapping support and
also file locking support,
so you can actually lock certain
sections of a file from other
threads within your application.
There's also support for
inter-process communication.
Remember, these are interruptible.
There's socket channel and pipe channel.
These are equivalent to the old
input and output stream classes
that you were accustomed to before.
The third part of the new
I/O APIs is the Unicode support.
This one's rather straightforward.
Since you might want to be doing text
processing on that input and output,
you want to have the support for mapping
directly from the bytes to Unicode,
and Java supports that.
It supports all Unicode encodings,
and that actually is done
specifically on the byte buffer
and character buffer classes.
The final part of the NIO functionality
is actually additions to the JNI methods.
They've basically added three
JNI functions so you can use new I/O.
First, there's the new direct
Method.
That lets you create a byte buffer
from your native code so that you
can actually wrap any pre-existing
native buffer in a direct byte
buffer and then pass it back to Java.
Then there's the opposite operation,
which is getting access to
the native buffer from the
encapsulating Java object,
which is the byte buffer.
You might be concerned that since
there's new functions available in the
1.4 Java Native interface that you will
have to update your old JNI libraries.
That is actually not the case.
Your old JNI libraries
will be compatible,
but there are other reasons
to maybe update yours.
The first one is actually to be able
to use the new I/O functionality.
The other reason is,
as was mentioned in the
Java VM internals talk,
we've actually made changes to the
Java implementation in Jaguar so that
we actually support JNI libraries
that are dilibs and not just bundles.
It might be a good opportunity
to switch over to doing that
with the 1.4 transition.
So, APIs are great,
but there's nothing better than
actually looking at some code.
I have here some example code that
I was using to check to see how
good the performance actually is.
There are three main things
I want to highlight as far
as the code is concerned.
The first one is how
to do memory map file input and output.
And that's pretty straightforward.
You still use the old file input stream.
And now file input stream
actually has a get channel method.
which gives you access to the channel.
At that point,
then you can call the mapping
function and you can say read
only or read/write and whatnot.
This is where it gets interesting.
This actual piece of code,
what I've actually done is that
what I'm doing is I'm reading
in a file of pixel information.
I'm making myself a copy,
which then I'm creating a server
for that I'm going to send
over to another application.
So the reason I'm making a copy
is because I'm then expecting the
other guy to send it back to me,
and I need to have some place to
store the pixels he sends back to me.
So I'm going to actually throw away the
reference to the memory mapped file.
So you can see that I actually allocate
the byte buffer as a byte buffer,
not as an int buffer,
even though we know that that's
the correct representation
for a buffered image.
And then here's a few operations.
You need to mark the buffer because
basically a buffer needs to know
what its beginning position is,
what its limit is,
and where the present location is,
which is actually known as the position.
By default, when you create a buffer,
it does not have a beginning location.
What you need to actually do is call
mark on it to make the beginning of
it the actual beginning location.
Otherwise you'll get an exception
later when you try to revert
to the beginning location.
Then reading the file contents
is as simple as calling put.
And that advances the buffer to the end.
So I need to do a reset to bring it
back all the way to the beginning.
The last operation you can
see right now is actually
copying into a Java int array.
As I said before,
this isn't integrated throughout
the Java runtime environment.
I actually still need to do the copy,
which would be great if I could avoid,
but unfortunately the
APIs don't support that yet.
That's basically what's going on there.
[Transcript missing]
There's selectors inside of
the Java and I/O package.
You create a server socket channel.
And then here's a key one right here.
By default,
it actually is set to blocking,
and you can get non-blocking
I/O simply by making it false.
Then you do your standard binding.
You need to bind that
channel to an address.
[Transcript missing]
So this is actually the iterator,
and this is where I actually
accept the connection.
And now what I'm actually going to do
is write my first transcending over
the pixels over to the other guy.
And you can see right here, where is it?
There it is.
So this is how you write to the channel.
And you'll see that I'm doing
that directly for my byte
buffer and not having to do
that directly from my int array,
even though I still needed that to
actually draw the pixels to the screen.
I use this position stuff to
figure out how far I've gone,
but you see that every time you write,
you actually update the
present position in the buffer.
So that gives you a general idea.
There's really good example code
available at the Sun website.
Just look for a new I/O and you'll
see plenty of great examples.
Now I want to give you a
demonstration of all this
technology we've been talking about.
You might have seen this before,
which is the Grand Canyon demo.
But what I want to emphasize this
time is actually what part of the
technologies that Jim and I have
been talking about today is actually
in use during this demonstration.
The Grand Canyon demo is a great flight
simulator written by Ken Russell,
who is a hotspot engineer over at Sun.
And what we have here
is a real-time renderer.
And right now, we have the notion of,
all right, we're flying in 1.3.1 mode,
and we're flying in 1.4 mode.
The reality is that we're running
this on the 1.4 VM that is available
to you in the developer preview.
Let me actually get it so
it's looking at something.
There we go.
And then I'll fly down.
So, where am I?
There we go.
Or somewhere.
I've actually never flown a plane.
All right,
so this is actually in 1.3.1 mode,
and the exciting thing is to
show you that... All right,
if I can fly a little
farther down... There we go.
You see that there's a choppiness,
but if I switch over to 1.4 mode,
it suddenly gets smooth,
and then I go back...
[Transcript missing]
So,
but both modes are running on the 1.4 VM.
So there are actually benefits to the
1.3.1 mode that wouldn't even be gotten
if you were running under a 1.3.1 VM.
Primarily,
all the deep inlining and compiler
optimizations that Jim talked about.
and are available to it.
So it actually,
if we were running this on a 1.3.1 VM,
even though I don't know how
well we could since it needs
to be able to run the 1.4 mode,
it wouldn't be running even this fast.
What the 1.3.1 mode is saying is that
basically the inner rendering loop
is using NIO and,
in contrast to the 1.3.1
inner rendering loop,
is actually using the typical
copy out to native buffer,
and then from there copy, copy out,
and then from there
I'm going to fly.
All right.
I'm going to leave this alone
if I can and just talk about it.
Let's see, is it in 1.3.1 mode?
Let me put it into... Oh, no,
that is 1.3.1 mode.
That is 1.4 mode.
There we go.
So...
The inner rendering loop needs to
get the pixels over to the graphics
card because this is actually
built on top of GL for Java.
By reducing the amount of copying
overhead by using Java New I.O.
That's the main part of where we
get the improvement in the drawing.
The other part where we get the
improvement is the fact that
by using all the deep inlining,
we actually are able to...
have no virtual function calls
inside of that tight rendering loop,
which actually makes a huge difference.
If you turn off the deep inlining,
the performance of this is
an order of magnitude worse.
That is basically
highlighting the fact that
All of the technologies we've
described today are going to
be benefiting your application.
That is that demonstration.
So in summary,
what we've done is we've discussed the
performance of your Java application.
We've told you what improvements
we're making for you in our changes
to the Hotspot JIT compiler,
and also what changes you might
want to make to your application
when writing in Java 1.4 that
will improve your performance.
What else?
Who to contact?
There's the contact information
for our technologies evangelist,
our product manager.
That's Alan Samuel and Alan Dennison,
Jim and myself.
Here's some more information.
Where to find us.
Where to find information
about 1.4 directly from Sun.
Also this great website that actually
gives you a pretty good synopsis
of all the other APIs that I didn't
go into too much depth about,
why you would be
interested in using them.
We also have performance
tips from last year's talk.
Last year's talk we actually talked
about how to profile your application,
that sort of thing.
We have handouts that
might be useful to you,
so please come and get those.
Here's a few more information
on how to find documentation,
how to contact us.
A lot of us read the
Java dev mailing list.
And how to get technical support,
DTS at Apple.com.